Welcome to JW Broadcasting®
for January 2023!
On October 1, 2022,
the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society
of Pennsylvania
held its annual meeting,
one of the most exciting events
on our theocratic calendar.
We are delighted to share
this special meeting with all of you.
Please enjoy Part 1
of this beautiful program.
It’s our pleasure
to welcome all of you
to the annual meeting
of the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society
of Pennsylvania.
Well, it’s been a hard year,
very hard for many.
Some are mourning the loss of loved ones.
Others are concerned
about the health of family members
or maybe of their own health.
Still others have lost everything they own
in a fire, a flood, or a hurricane.
And when you lose your home
in a natural disaster,
usually you lose your job too.
If your home has been affected,
your place of work is affected.
So many of these folks
won’t have any way to get their home back
because they have no job.
So it’s been a tough year.
And all of us need encouragement.
And so it’s our prayer
that by the end of this program,
you’re going to feel encouraged,
spiritually built up,
and absolutely convinced
that no matter what has happened
or what is going to happen,
Jehovah is going to help you through
and He’s going to take care of you.
Now, the program is going
to feature a number of videos
interspersed with talks
from various members of the Governing Body.
I don’t know
what they’re going to talk about,
but they certainly have chosen
some interesting themes.
I’m going to be on the edge of my seat
to see what they have to tell us.
But first up is a video
on one of our favorite subjects
—Caleb and Sophia.
Now, just so you know,
Caleb is not a member of the Governing Body,
but he’s going to be
on the program anyway.
Now, this is the longer version.
They call it the epic version.
It’s part of the series
Become Jehovah’s Friend.
And the title is
Who Should Be My Friend?
Let’s watch.
You got this!
Come on!
Go, go, go!
Yes!
Bro, that was good!
Hurry up, we’re gonna be late!
Yeah, let’s go!
Woo!
And he called them his friends.
We see throughout the Gospel accounts
that those
who chose to befriend Jesus
gained the best friend possible.
Hey there!
Oh, hey!
Oh, you like to draw?
I like your notes.
Really cool.
Mom taught me.
Pictures help me remember.
Me too.
So it looks like we have a talk together.
Yeah.
I’ll be in touch to practice soon.
Lydia, we’re leaving.
Well, I gotta go.
See you later, Sophia.
Hey, bro.
Hey, good to see you.
I’m glad I was on your team.
My favorite thing was the safari tree house.
Yeah! It had all
the cool jungle animals on the wall.
Timmy, I didn’t think your team
was gonna make it.
I love my prize.
You got a prize?
We all did.
Umm.
Hehe.
OK, kids, settle down.
It’s time to get started.
We have a lot to talk about today.
Before we begin,
for those of you that participated
in the Science Club this weekend,
we will be having another camping trip.
But only the ones
with the highest score on the math project
will be selected to go.
More on that after class.
Hey, Sophia.
We need you in our club.
You’re good at science.
We have another trip coming up.
Hey, Sophia!
Come with us.
So anyway, all the kids had badges
and prizes and stuff,
and it sounded like a lot of fun.
And it seems like they really need my help.
Hmm.
I see.
Oh, you see what’s wrong with the car?
No, I wish.
No, I see why you want to be in the club.
You do?
Of course.
We all want to have friends
and do fun things.
Please, would you mind moving
the light over here?
Uh, right there, thank you.
I just wish I had some kid friends.
Hmm.
Jehovah wants you and me to have friends.
But the question you need to ask yourself is,
‘Who should be my friend?’
Let’s talk about it
at our next family worship.
How about you go do some research on Martha.
And I will tell Caleb too.
And then we can come back together
and talk about it as a family.
Sophia, are you ready?
Yeah!
“Martha.
A Jewess, the sister of Lazarus and Mary.”
They lived in Bethany,
“a village ‘about two miles’ away
from Jerusalem,”
which was probably Jesus’ home base
when he came down from Galilee.
Martha liked to cook.
Yes, she did.
And she would cook for Jesus
and all his disciples when they would visit.
Wow!
That would have been a lot of food.
Yes, and a lot of work.
But if they work together,
they’d make it a success.
However, some of their friends
felt differently about Jesus.
Martha makes the best apricot cakes.
It’s just a fact.
You’ve always praised me too much, Talia.
Well, if it gets me more apricot cakes,
I will continue to praise you.
Oh Talia, did you hear?
The Teacher, Jesus,
he’s coming back to visit.
The man from Galilee?
Are you— Are you hosting him again?
Yes, I am.
Actually, it’s tonight.
I’ve heard a lot of talk.
The Pharisees in Jerusalem,
they don’t approve of that man.
I am not sure it’s such a good idea
for you to be known as his friend.
OK, well, I guess I better be getting home.
See you two later.
Martha!
Jesus is here.
Wait, wait, wait, wait.
Let me get this straight.
He wanted you and Mary
to sit and learn about God just like the men?
A teacher instructing women?
A woman’s job
is to provide food for her household.
That’s true!
A good woman
“prepares herself for hard work.”
That’s valuable.
That’s you, Martha.
Don’t let this Jesus ruin you with his ideas.
Lazarus!
So kind of you.
How is he doing?
Not well.
I sent word to Jesus.
He will help my brother.
You sent word to Jesus?
Have you still not heard?
He’s angering people
with his shocking speech.
He’s claiming to be God’s Son.
He’s crazy!
He’s loyal to Jehovah, and he is our friend.
Sadly, Lazarus died.
But do you remember what happened next?
Jesus came back to Bethany
and resurrected Lazarus.
Jesus was a real friend.
He cared about Martha, Mary, and Lazarus,
and he showed them
what kind of Friend Jehovah can be to us.
But that’s not where this story ends.
Do you know what some people did after that?
“Many of the Jews . . .
who saw what he did put faith in him,
“but some of them went off to the Pharisees
and told them what Jesus had done.”
Why did they do that?
Because not even seeing Jesus
bring someone back to life
was enough to convince them
that he was the Christ.
They seemed like Martha’s friends,
but they hated Jesus.
How do you think Martha dealt
with her unbelieving friends?
Jesus is the Christ,
“the resurrection and the life.”
He is the Son of God.
And he is my friend.
Talia, you’ve been kind to me in the past.
But you don’t believe Jesus’ teachings.
We cannot be friends.
Martha stuck with Jesus and his friends.
They helped her become Jehovah’s friend.
So, Sophia,
what do you think Jehovah is teaching you
about friendship?
That I have to choose my friends carefully.
And how can you know
if someone should be your friend?
If they help me be Jehovah’s friend.
I’m not going to join the club.
That’s my girl.
We are so proud of you, Sophia.
And Jehovah is proud of you too.
Now,
how about you go finish up your homework?
Mom tells me we have a guest coming over.
OK.
Jehovah, please help me find a good friend,
someone who loves you.
At least you’re my friend.
Sophia!
Lydia is here.
Our talk!
Do you like turtles?
I love turtles!
Really?
I’ve got something I want to show you.
He is so cute.
You know, Sophia,
I think we’re going to be friends.
Yup, definitely friends.
Admit it.
You enjoy watching Caleb and Sophia
just as much as the kids do.
And we know,
because we get letters from adults.
Now, we’re going to enjoy
the first of the talks
by members of the Governing Body,
and this one will be delivered
by Brother Gerrit Lösch.
He has a very interesting theme
“Supported
by the ‘Pillar . . . of the Truth.’”
Brother Lösch, please.
Is the following statement true or false?
“Truth is relative.”
That statement
is not relatively but absolutely false.
Some think
that something is truth for one person
but not truth for another person.
Many religious organizations
claim to have the truth.
However, between them
there are many contradicting teachings.
Is this just another evidence
that all truth is relative
—that there is no absolute truth?
No.
The truth is that truth is not relative;
it is absolute.
Those who say truth is relative
are not only relatively but absolutely wrong.
The Hebrew word for “truth,” ʼemethʹ,
is often rendered “truth”
and may designate what is firm,
trustworthy, stable, or faithful.
The Greek word for “truth,”
a·leʹthei·a,
originates with a word meaning
“not concealed,”
so the truth often involves the revealing
of that which was formerly hidden.
Jesus said according to Luke 12:2:
“But there is nothing carefully concealed
that will not be revealed,
and nothing secret
that will not become known.”
There are over 70 places
in the Gospel accounts
where Jesus is said
to have used a unique expression
to emphasize the truthfulness of his words.
He would often say “Amen”
to introduce a sentence.
The corresponding Hebrew word
meant “certain, true.”
Notes The New International Dictionary
of New Testament Theology:
“By introducing his words with amen
“Jesus labelled them as certain and reliable.
“He stood by them and made them binding
on himself and his hearers.”
The New International Dictionary
of New Testament Theology,
Volume 3, page 901, says:
“[Many people try] to ‘unmask’ everything,
“in the belief that no one and nothing
“can genuinely lay claim to truth. . . .
“Truth can indeed be found . . .
“[We need to display]
a humble submission to truth
“whenever and wherever it emerges.
“Such openness to truth is required
“of those who worship the God of truth . . .
“Reverence for truth ensures honesty
“in a man’s dealings with his neighbour,
“both in word and deed.
“This is the attitude . . .
to which both the O[ld] T[estament]
and the N[ew] T[estament] bear witness.”
Does the truth ever change?
That question was raised by V. R. Ruggiero
in his book The Art of Thinking.
His answer is no.
To quote him:
“It may sometimes seem to [that it changes],
but on closer inspection
it will be found not to.”
Yes, the truth never changes!
“Consider,” he says,
“the case of the authorship
“of the first book of the Bible,
the book of Genesis.
“For centuries Christians and Jews alike
“believed that the book had a single author.
“In time this view was challenged,
“and eventually replaced by the belief
“that as many as five authors
contributed to Genesis.
“Then, in 1981,
“the results of a 5-year linguistic analysis
of Genesis
“were published,
stating that there is
“an 82 percent probability
of single authorship,
“as originally thought.
“Has the truth
about the authorship of Genesis changed?
“No.
Only our belief has changed.”
He also wrote:
“The truth will not be changed
by our knowledge or by our ignorance.”
And we agree.
In fact, no one really believes
that there is no truth.
When it comes to physical realities,
such as medicine, mathematics,
or the laws of physics,
all people believe that some things are true.
Who of us would dare to ride in an airplane
if we didn’t believe
that the laws of aerodynamics
were absolute truths?
Verifiable truths do exist.
They surround us,
and we stake our lives on them.
Does the truth ever change?
It does not.
Our understanding of truth changes
as we progress in understanding it,
but the truth never changes.
When Jesus said that our purpose in life
was to talk about the truth,
he was speaking of something
that faithful Jews had valued
for centuries.
In their sacred writings,
the Jews had long read of truth
as something concrete, not theoretical.
In the Bible,
“truth” translates the Hebrew word ʼemethʹ,
which signifies that which is firm, solid
and, perhaps most of all, reliable.
The Jews had good reason
for viewing truth in that way.
They called their God,
“Jehovah, the God of truth.”
This was because everything Jehovah said
he would do, he did.
When he made promises, he kept them.
When he inspired prophecies,
they were fulfilled.
When he uttered final judgments,
they were carried out.
Millions of Israelites
had been eyewitnesses of these realities.
The inspired writers of the Bible
recorded them
as indisputable facts of history.
Unlike other books viewed as sacred,
the Bible is not set
against a backdrop of myth or legend.
It is firmly grounded in verifiable facts
—historical, archaeological, scientific,
and sociological realities.
No wonder the psalmist says to Jehovah:
“Your law is truth. . . .
“All your commandments are truth. . . .
The very essence of your word is truth”!
Since Jehovah God is the Author of the Bible,
the Bible is truth.
Jesus Christ echoed the words of that psalm
when he said in prayer to Jehovah:
“Your word is truth.”
Jesus knew that everything his Father spoke
was absolutely firm and reliable.
Likewise,
Jesus himself was “full of . . . truth.”
Yes,
Jesus was even the personification of truth.
The Mosaic Law was truth.
But it was not the full truth.
Jesus taught something different
from the Mosaic Law.
The Bible shows that the Mosaic Law
was a “shadow,” or prophetic picture,
of greater realities,
which came true through Christ.
So the Mosaic Law was not the full truth
but a pattern of it.
Jesus was not the shadow but the reality.
He said at John 14:6:
“I am . . . the truth.”
But as far as teachings are concerned,
what is truth?
What helps us to understand it?
The Bible speaks
of “the spirit of the truth.”
What is “the spirit of the truth”?
It is the spirit
that proceeds from Jehovah God.
It is pure and holy.
Jesus told his disciples at John 16:12, 13:
“I still have many things to say to you,
“but you are not able to bear them now.
“However, when that one comes,
“the spirit of the truth,
“he will guide you into all the truth,
“for he will not speak of his own initiative,
“but what he hears he will speak,
“and he will declare to you
the things to come.”
God’s spirit would teach them
everything they needed to know
to carry out their work,
recalling and opening up their understanding
to things
they had previously heard from Jesus
but had not understood.
God’s spirit would also declare to them
the things coming,
including the bringing to light
the significance
of Jesus’ death and resurrection,
as these events were then yet future
and were among the things
that his disciples did not understand
in the beginning.
Brother Charles Taze Russell wrote the book
The Divine Plan of the Ages.
It was published in 1886.
It included a discussion on
“The Bible as a Divine Revelation
Viewed in the Light of Reason.”
It said:
“The depth and power and wisdom
and scope of the Bible’s testimony
convince us that not man,
but Almighty God, is the author.”
To appreciate the truth more,
to what can we compare the truth?
Truth is like a mirror
that helps us to see the facts
and, if necessary, to improve our looks.
Truth is like a pillar
—firm and supportive—
and it helps to combat false teachings.
Truth is also compared
to a girdle, or “belt,”
that warriors used.
It helps us to continue with right conduct.
Truth is like a rainbow for beauty.
Truth is as beautiful
as the song of the nightingale.
Truth is like a romantic bonfire for warmth
on a cold evening.
Here is an illustration
that many of you will like:
Truth is like the first cup of coffee
in the morning,
invigorating somebody.
Yes, truth is invigorating.
Truth is like a magnet,
drawing honest-hearted ones to God.
Truth is like an oasis in the desert.
Truth is like an anchor in the stormy seas.
Truth is like a lifeboat on a sinking ship.
Truth is like a lighthouse in the night,
guiding a boat safely to the shore or harbor.
Truth is like a compass
showing sailors the way.
But it is also like a compass
showing the way out of a jungle
to a safe area.
Truth is like the rising sun
bathing the landscape in warm light.
Truth is like the display of fireworks
for beauty.
Truth is like the magnetic shield
around the earth,
protecting it from deathly cosmic radiation.
Truth is like light.
“The fruitage of the light
consists of every sort of . . . truth.”
He that “does what is true
comes to the light,”
the Bible says.
Imagine you were born blind
and received eyesight through an operation.
Wouldn’t you be elated?
Truth is like that when somebody
comes to know and appreciate it.
Truth is like beautiful music
played solo or by an orchestra.
Truth is like the most delicious food
for taste and gives strength.
Truth is what a nursing mother is
to her baby.
Truth is like a hidden treasure;
we need to dig for it.
Truth is like refreshing water on a hot day.
Truth is like a mighty river.
If you try to stop it with a dam,
it will overflow the dam.
Nobody can stop the truth.
Why?
Because Jehovah, the Almighty,
is backing it up.
Truth is like a flower
or even a bouquet
of beautiful little flowers.
Brother Russell once wrote:
“Truth, like a modest little flower
“in the wilderness of life,
“is surrounded and almost  choked
“by the luxuriant growth
of the weeds of error.
“If you would find it
you must be ever on the lookout.
“If you would see its beauty
you must brush aside the weeds of error
“and the brambles of bigotry.
“If you would possess it
you must stoop to get it.
“Be not content with one  flower of truth.
“Had one been sufficient
there would have been no more.
Gather ever, seek for more.”
Truth is like a fragrance, or perfume.
Truth is like a sparkling diamond.
Do you love diamonds?
But the truth’s value
is so much more than diamonds
because it brings Jehovah’s friendship
and leads to everlasting life.
Truth is compared to a way on which we walk.
Second Peter 2:2
speaks of “the way of the truth.”
‘God is a Spirit,
and those who worship him
must do so with spirit and truth.’
Now is the time to study the truth
and attend Christian meetings
where the truth is taught.
Do not miss congregation meetings.
First Timothy 3:15 compares the congregation
with “a pillar . . . of the truth.”
The congregation
preserves the purity of the truth
and upholds it.
True, Jehovah teaches us through the Bible
but also through Christian meetings.
We are also to speak the truth by preaching.
We speak the truth also with one another.
We have the truth on our lips;
we have the truth around our hips.
Ephesians 6:14 says
that we have “the belt of truth
fastened around [our] waist.”
The world is in utter confusion.
What a blessing it is to know the truth!
We rejoice in it!
We are ready to preach the truth
and teach the truth.
Yes, we talk the truth,
and we walk in the truth.
At 3 John 3, we read:
“Go on walking in the truth.”
Those who walk in the truth now
will walk forever.
Micah 4:5 says:
“For all the peoples will walk,
each in the name of its god,
“we will walk
in the name of Jehovah our God
forever and ever.”
And that is a long time!
Help your students to love the truth
and to live the truth
but, if necessary, to be willing
to die for the truth and for Jehovah.
The truth is invincible
and will conquer this wicked world.
May we all,
including our relatives
and our Bible students,
have the determination to walk in the truth
and talk about the truth.
Why shall we do this?
Because we love the truth
and we love the God of truth.
We are also to live the truth
by our Christian conduct.
Brothers, this is the truth!
His Word is truth.
Keep talking the truth,
and keep walking in the truth.
Then you will walk forever
and praise our loving God of truth!
Thank you
for that absorbing presentation, Gerrit.
We really appreciated it.
At this time, let’s listen
as Brother Geoffrey Jackson
speaks to us on the theme
“Be Alert, Be Decisive.”
We are living in the last of the last days.
That means soon we are going to face events
that will test our integrity as never before.
Yes, now is the time
that we need to be alert and decisive.
Now, that’s a similar situation
to what our brothers
found themselves in in the first century.
Yes, they had some dramatic events
that faced them.
What were some of the events
that early Christians had to deal with,
and how did Jesus prepare them
to face those events?
And what does it mean for us today?
Well, first of all,
I’d like you to imagine this scene.
We’ll go back in time to Nisan 9, 33 C.E.
Do you remember what happened on that day?
Jesus was mounted on a donkey.
And in your mind, can you visualize it?
You’re with Jesus
as he starts to go down the area
on the Mount of Olives in the Kidron Valley,
and looking up toward the city of Jerusalem,
what happens?
The crowds start to gather
—more and more people.
People start throwing
their garments on the road;
others cut down branches
and wave them around.
They call out: “Blessed is the one
who comes in Jehovah’s name!”
The whole city is in an uproar!
How exciting that would have been!
And yet, at that exciting moment in his life,
Jesus started sobbing and crying.
Why?
Let’s turn to the record in Luke chapter 19
—Luke chapter 19
and verses 41 through 44.
And here the inspired account tells us
that “when [Jesus] got nearby,
“he viewed the city
“and wept over it,
“saying: ‘If you, even you,
had discerned on this day
“‘the things having to do with peace
“‘—but now they have been hidden
from your eyes.
“‘Because the days will come upon you
“‘when your enemies will build around you
a fortification of pointed stakes
“‘and will encircle you
and besiege you from every side.
“‘They will dash you
and your children within you to the ground,
“‘and they will not leave a stone
upon a stone in you,
because you did not discern
the time of your being inspected.’”
What do we see from these verses?
Do we see the compassion
Jesus had for those who would be killed
when Jerusalem was to be destroyed?
Yes, he was envisioning the destruction
that would occur in the year 70 C.E.
He was moved by the emotions of that
—so much so that he cried loudly,
not silently
(like he did when
he was about to resurrect Lazarus)
but audibly and loudly.
Now, what do we learn from this?
Well, for a start, we can see Jehovah’s love
for people as reflected in Jesus.
Jesus was very distraught
thinking about what would happen
to that city and its inhabitants.
And then in verse 44,
what was the other thing
that Jesus was distressed about?
That that was a time
of judgment, we might say, or inspection.
Yes, even though Jesus
was thinking ahead to future events,
he realized that they
were missing the opportunity at that time
to do something
—things that they needed to
do to prepare for the future.
There’s something else that we learn too.
Not only do we learn
from the compassion that Jesus displayed
(which we should likewise display
when we think about what’s
going to happen to this wicked world)
but also if Jesus
had so much emotion and feeling
about wicked people
who were about to be destroyed,
how do you think he felt about his followers?
Do you think he wanted to prepare them?
Of course.
And that’s why we’re not surprised
that two days later
he took aside his apostles
and gave them some instructions.
Let’s turn there to the record
in Luke 21:20-22.
Jesus is recorded as saying:
“However, when you see Jerusalem
surrounded by encamped armies
“[now in this case,
he’s referring to 66 C.E.],
“then know that the desolating
of her has drawn near.
“Then let those in Judea
begin fleeing to the mountains,
“let those in the midst of her
“[that is, in the midst of Jerusalem] leave,
“and let those in the countryside
“not enter into her
[or, enter into Jerusalem],
“because these are days
for meting out justice
in order that all the things
written may be fulfilled.”
Did you notice that there were three groups
of his followers that he was referring to?
He spoke about those who lived “in Judea,”
so that wasn’t just Jerusalem;
that was the surrounding area.
So they were told: ‘Get out of there.
Flee; go to the mountains.’
Then he spoke to those
who would be living in Jerusalem.
And what did he say?
‘Leave the city.’
And then the third group,
those who would live “in the countryside”
—we know many people were farmers,
and they lived in open areas,
doing agriculture.
Normally, what would be expected
is that if armies
were to come to a certain area,
these people would flee
into the fortified city.
So, what Jesus told them
to do was the opposite.
So no matter where his followers would be,
whether in the countryside,
in the city, or in the general area,
what was the common denominator?
Don’t flee to the city.
Don’t put your trust in Jerusalem.
Yes, Jesus was telling them
what they needed to know
before the events would occur.
Now, what really was the lesson
that Jesus was impressing on these ones?
Well, although those
he was speaking to at that time were Jewish,
they had to realize that Jerusalem
was no longer the earthly seat
of Jehovah’s Kingdom.
They had to also realize that the temple
was no longer
the center of Jehovah’s worship.
So Christians had to get those facts
clearly in mind
and make their decisions at that time,
prior to the events that would come later.
Now, maybe we could illustrate
in the modern sense.
Many of us have had to face the issue
with regard to blood transfusions.
When do you need to make your decision
with regard to that?
Is it when you’re in the ambulance,
semiconscious, in pain?
Is it, “Oh, give me the DPA;
can you read the fine print”?
Or is it when you get
into the emergency operating room
and you start arguing with people
and asking questions?
No.
We realize that now is the time
that we need to make our decisions.
Then we need to live by those decisions.
And then if an emergency should occur,
we’ll be ready for that situation.
That was the lesson Jesus was teaching them.
Yes, the Christians back in the first century
had to rid themselves
of any feelings of nationalistic pride,
any feelings that Jerusalem was the city.
Otherwise, they would make
the wrong decision.
This was especially true
in the year 66 C.E.
What happened in that year?
Well, let’s consider a brief overview.
Most of us are familiar with what happened
toward the end of 66 C.E.
At that time, the Roman army,
under the leadership of Cestius Gallus,
attacked Jerusalem.
But unexpectedly, they retreated,
allowing time for Christians in the city
to flee Jerusalem.
Was that the only thing that happened
in the year 66 C.E.?
No.
Let’s look back in time
to see what other events took place.
This will help us understand why Christians
needed to be alert and decisive beforehand.
First, let’s think about the background.
The Jewish nation was fed up
with Roman taxation and corruption
way back in Jesus’ day.
But by the beginning of 66 C.E.,
the situation was even worse.
The Roman governor of Judea, Gessius Florus,
was totally corrupt
and was notorious for his cruelty.
The spirit of rebellion was everywhere.
Judea was a powder keg ready to explode.
Around the spring of 66 C.E.,
Florus plundered the temple treasury in Jerusalem,
stealing some 17 talents.
This caused a revolt among the Jews.
In retaliation, Florus ordered his soldiers
to attack the rebels and allowed his soldiers
to plunder hundreds of homes
and to kill some 3,600 Jews.
However, the Roman assault was repelled,
and Florus and his men retreated from the city.
If you were there at that time,
how would you have reacted?
Would you have been outraged by Florus’ action?
If you lived in the countryside,
would you think the Romans may return
and now was the time to flee to Jerusalem?
Christians needed to be alert and decisive.
Remember,
Jerusalem was not important to Christians.
It was not the place of safety.
What happened next?
Eleazar, the son of High Priest Ananias,
gained control of the temple area.
He suspended the sacrifices offered to the emperor
and then drove the remaining Romans
out of the upper part of the city.
If you were there,
would you have been proud,
happy that the corrupt Romans
were forced to leave?
Remember, though,
Jerusalem was not important to Christians.
It was not the place of safety.
Christians needed to be alert
and decisive and not distracted.
Then around July/August,
Menahem, the leader of another Jewish faction,
overran the Roman fortress of Masada
and seized Roman weapons from there.
He then returned to Jerusalem
and captured the Tower, or Fortress, of Antonia.
They set fire to Herod’s palace,
the palaces of Agrippa and Bernice,
as well as High Priest Ananias’ home.
Then they ordered the murder
of High Priest Ananias and his brother Hezekiah.
Following that,
they returned to the Fortress of Antonia
and massacred the garrison
of Roman soldiers still there.
The city was divided and in an uproar,
so Menahem and his men
escaped back to Masada.
Do you see how easy it would have been
to join sides with one of the factions?
Remember, though, these events
were not important to Christians.
They needed to be alert and decisive
and not distracted.
Finally, around November,
Cestius Gallus, the governor of Syria,
marched with his troops
encamped about six miles from Jerusalem.
Even though it was a Sabbath day,
the Jewish rebels streamed out of the city
and made a hasty assault on the Romans.
The Romans retreated to Beth-horon,
and the Jews captured
Roman supplies and weapons.
Agrippa sent two representatives,
his personal friends,
to the Jewish rebels
to persuade them to lay down their weapons
and to promise them clemency.
But the rebels killed one of the men
and wounded the other.
Cestius pursued the rebels to Jerusalem,
camped at Mount Scopus for three days,
and then started to undermine the city wall
and tried to set fire to the gate of the temple.
But then, for some unexpected reason,
Gallus and his army retreated.
Alert Christians in Jerusalem and Judea
immediately acted decisively and fled.
The rebels chased the Roman army,
inflicting considerable losses
in both men and supplies,
and Gallus ordered his soldiers to retreat.
After seven days,
the Jewish rebels gave up chasing the Romans
and pillaged the supplies left behind.
They returned to Jerusalem after eight days.
What was the situation in Jerusalem at that time?
Josephus says:
“In [the] face of the exhilaration
“which now seized Jerusalem
“the spokesmen for peace [with Rome]
“were obliged to remain silent. . . .
“Even those opposed to the war
“were swept along by the force
of the circumstances.”
Those who supported Rome left.
“All the rest
“were won over to the side of the rebels,
partly by force, partly by persuasion.”
If you were there,
what would you have done?
Many Jews started to flee to Jerusalem,
seeking refuge there.
But was it a safe refuge?
No.
There was anarchy in the city.
Several Jewish political factions fought each other.
Eventually, in 70 C.E.,
Jerusalem was destroyed along with its temple.
But the Christians who were alert
and decisive were safe,
far away in Pella,
on the other side of the Jordan River.
What do we learn from this brief review
of the events of 66 C.E.?
It wasn’t just one event
—was it?—
but a series of events.
Were you amazed at how many events
occurred in 66 C.E.?
And that was just a brief summary.
There were many divisive political
and religious issues
that could have been
distracting to Christians.
So those Christians
needed to remain focused on their hope.
They needed to remember
that Jerusalem and its temple
gave no security for them.
Why should we be so interested
in all of this today?
Notice what else Jesus said,
as recorded at Luke chapter 21,
verses 34 through 36:
“Pay attention to yourselves
“that your hearts never become weighed down
“with overeating and heavy drinking
“and anxieties of life,
“and suddenly that day
“be instantly upon you as a snare.
“For it will come upon all those
“dwelling on the face of the whole earth.
“Keep awake, then,
“all the time making supplication
“that you may succeed in escaping
“all these things that must occur
and in standing before the Son of man.”
Jesus said that these things would occur
“on the face of the whole earth.”
That means he wasn’t just talking
about Christians in the first century;
he was talking about us today.
Yes, we need to pay attention and be alert.
He also reminded us to make supplication,
yes, to strengthen
our relationship with Jehovah.
What does this mean for us today?
As we face the great tribulation,
brothers and sisters,
we don’t know exactly
all the details of what will happen,
but we do know that Jesus did not mean
that we would have to flee
from one literal city
or go to a certain mountain range.
How could we?
We’re scattered
over the whole face of the earth.
But we do need to remember the same things
that the first-century Christians
needed to remember.
Don’t put our trust
in the religious
and political systems of Satan’s world.
Why is this so vital?
Just as in 66 C.E.,
today we see one event after another
leading up to the final day.
Everywhere there is evidence
of political instability and infighting
not only among nations
but also within nations.
Religious, political, and social issues
—including abortion and homosexuality—
have become divisive topics.
Scientific issues, such as global warming,
have also become political issues.
Just as in the first century,
we must take to heart Jesus’ warning:
Don’t take sides in the chaos
that’s happening all around us.
Yes, keep your focus on the Kingdom hope.
Remember, soon we will face events
that will test our integrity as never before.
So, what are the takeaway points?
Well, first of all, we realize
that now is the time we need
to make decisions
and stick to those decisions.
Yes, we need to be absolutely determined
not to put our faith
and trust in worldly politics.
We need to remain neutral,
always thinking of God’s Kingdom.
We also need to remember that it’s
not just one event coming up in the future.
It can be a series of events
all happening at the same time
that could be distracting.
But if we have made up our decision now,
we’ll be ready for that time.
And also we remember the need to keep
our relationship strong with Jehovah God.
And we remember the compassion of Jesus.
So Jehovah and Jesus want us
to be protected at that time.
So may we be determined
to continue to be alert and decisive!
Well, that was really interesting, wasn’t it?
A lot of work went into that video,
and I’m sure glad we saw it.
It certainly brought everything home to us.
Well, the brothers in Ukraine
have been in our prayers.
And as we know,
many fled the country because of the war.
Some of them, when they fled
just had the clothes on their back
or just a little bit more than that.
So the question is,
How were they cared for in their new country?
Well, this next video, just a short one,
is going to tell us about the love
that was shown to our brothers
in neighboring countries
and the tremendous amount of work
that was involved
in caring for these refugees.
We thought that this might be
some kind of pushing between the empires,
but something else happened
—the worst-case scenario.
We were aware of the fact
that we had to prepare
for some serious changes.
There were thousands of people
at the border.
People had to wait in long queues
several kilometers long.
Almost every day,
we received 200 or more refugees
—our brothers and sisters
who were seeking refuge in Poland.
It was really touching,
since most of them had only one bag.
It was not possible to take more.
The brothers of the Coordinators’ Committee
of the Governing Body
were analyzing with us
about how to help and what we could do.
Immediately
the first Disaster Relief Committee
was set up,
and when we realized that there was
already a need in the whole of Poland,
16 committees started their work.
The number of DC-50 applications,
of those who wanted to volunteer,
increased every week by thousands,
indicating that the willingness
and readiness to help was huge.
We prepared everything in order to be able
to welcome the refugees
at the border crossings,
at the reception points set up
by the authorities on the Ukrainian border,
and at other locations
where the trains from Ukraine were arriving.
We knew we would have to ask
the congregations for accommodations.
At the beginning,
we prepared a survey
that helped us to organize everything.
We know that it’s thanks to Jehovah’s backing
because in just a few days,
we received more than 7,500 replies.
Four Assembly Halls and 22 Kingdom Halls
were temporarily converted
to refugee relief centers.
The brothers were traveling for days
and needed some basic things
—hygienic products, diapers for children,
and many other things—
not only clothes but many basic necessities.
They received food;
they could warm up,
take a shower,
and get some rest.
In addition to this, in many places,
volunteers prepared rooms
for donated garments
where brothers and sisters
could choose clothing.
In some places, brothers prepared
special areas for children
where there were toys, crayons,
something to draw on, something to play with
so that the children could feel busy there.
Doing something helped them
to get their minds off what they saw
when they were fleeing.
The children expressed their gratitude
in their pictures.
Almost everywhere they wrote: “Dziękuję.”
“Spasiba.”  (Thank you.)
They drew pictures of Paradise,
expressions of their hope.
It was so touching.
The circuit overseers
together with the elders
did something absolutely spectacular.
In the beginning,
some of these brothers
made hundreds of shepherding calls
in two or three weeks.
The goal was to deliver
40,000 humanitarian aid boxes.
We were responsible for purchasing food,
hygiene products, first-aid items,
medical supplies.
We had to find a logistical location
where we could store all of this.
Afterward,
we had to think about how to pack it,
how to deliver it to the border,
and then how to transport it to Ukraine,
where at this very moment the war continued.
It was very nice to observe the volunteers
who came to help us pack up the supplies.
When the brothers from all over the country
got to know about the need,
they were ready to drive
300 or more kilometers (185 miles)
for many hours
to devote a couple of hours to packing boxes.
As it turned out later on,
it was more or less 190 tons of supplies.
In each package,
we also put some drawings made by children.
There was an expression of love
in those humanitarian aid boxes.
Having this opportunity to help the brothers,
we saw an expression of Jehovah’s love
and might in all these efforts.
Only Jehovah could prepare his people
for such a well-organized
and effective activity.
Many of the brothers have commented
that the fact that they see
so much being done to help the brothers
in Ukraine right now
convinces them that if they are
in that situation in the future,
if there is some time when they need
that love or they need the help,
well, Jehovah’s organization
is going to be there to help them as well.
Belonging to Jehovah’s household
and being part of a worldwide family
is priceless.
The hatred in the world
continues to grow constantly,
and there’s just more conflict and disunity.
At the same time,
the unity and the love of Jehovah’s people
just keeps on increasing,
and it just becomes more and more powerful.
So we want to thank
all those who had a share
in providing that humanitarian assistance.
A lot of work, a lot of thought,
a lot of planning went into that,
and it certainly is appreciated.
But now, how did the brothers from Ukraine
get to these neighboring countries?
Well, they had
some pretty hair-raising experiences.
So the next video is going
to recount some of their experiences.
And you may need
to have a hankie handy.
We thought it might be a truck driving by.
When it happened again, we got up
and started reading the news on the Internet,
and we found out that there were explosions
happening in all the cities.
My mom awoke from her sleep
to sirens sounding all over the city.
Of course, we were very anxious
and turned on the TV immediately,
but we didn’t even have
to look for information
because all the channels were already talking
about the fact that war had started.
We just immediately
started praying to Jehovah,
calling friends and close ones
and asking how they were,
and waiting for guidance from the brothers.
At 5:30 a.m.,
a brother from Kyiv called us
and said that the bombs were landing in Kyiv.
We immediately got up, woke up the children,
and told them about the situation.
And we didn’t let the children go to school.
We realized that our lives had changed.
We read the daily text, but I want to note
that this scripture is well-known for us.
It used to be a yeartext
and, of course, we knew it.
But at that moment, it sounded special.
I mean, it was like personal guidance,
such a personal answer
from Jehovah to everyone.
And I understood what I had to do.
And that day,
brothers created a Zoom meeting
that ran for the whole day.
And brothers and sisters
could connect via Zoom to preach,
talk to each other, and support each other.
We were all together.
Every day it became more difficult.
It became more difficult to deliver food,
and the food became more expensive.
People started to panic,
which led to panic buying of medicines
and basic staple products.
Yes, before that, during the pandemic,
for two years now,
brothers had been constantly reminding us
of the necessity of go bags.
And then, closer to the war,
reminders also began to come from brothers
about not only stocking up on such backpacks
but also about checking
what condition they were in.
And it was also recommended to stock up
on food for two months in advance.
When the war started,
we were really frightened
because I was
in my ninth month of pregnancy,
and I could go into labor at any moment.
We prayed a lot.
We wanted to work out what to do next,
what the right thing for us to do was.
We weren’t sure
what was going on or how it would end.
But when we heard that next to us
they bombed a hospital
and they bombed a dormitory, we understood
we had to find a safer place.
It was then that my husband
made the decision that we should go.
We couldn’t leave
because I wasn’t able to travel.
Even to transport me
from one room to the other was a problem.
So the situation
really was such that in our case
it was very difficult to leave.
And it was very hard to stay
because almost every day
the area was being shelled.
My dad is
in quite a difficult condition right now.
He is completely blind with poor hearing;
he had a stroke
and broke his hip a few months ago.
So now he is completely bedridden
and requires constant care.
Katya’s mom is hard of hearing,
and she broke her arm.
It is our duty to take care of our parents.
It is a commandment that Jehovah gave,
but we did not know
how we could do it in this situation.
When the war started,
in the first days of it,
my grandfather had a second stroke,
and worries about him
were added to the situation.
We had to take care of him
because he could not eat.
Only my mom, my older brother,
my grandmother, and I
are Jehovah’s Witnesses in our family.
My dad was worried about my safety.
We understood that out of our whole family,
I was the only one who could leave.
Before we left, my husband
called an elder from our congregation.
He and his wife were already
in the west of Ukraine at the time,
and they gave us a lot of advice.
They gave us advice
on how to behave at roadblocks,
that we should hide our phones
and not take photos of anything.
They were advising us
on which villages to go through
because there were
very big traffic jams at the time
and people were stopped in some traffic jams
for 10 to 12 hours.
There were no lights.
We drove large sections
of the road in one go,
constantly praying
that we wouldn’t get a flat tire,
that the car wouldn’t break down,
and that we wouldn’t get stuck in a field.
Before each checkpoint, we were so nervous
because local militia
when drunk could be unpredictable,
but since they had weapons
—combat weapons—
we were afraid not only of the invaders
but of the locals as well.
I don’t think we ever prayed
as much as we did
during those hours on the road.
My husband tried to stay as calm as possible
and reassure me so that I wouldn’t worry.
A sister found out
that there would be an evacuation train,
and we kind of wanted to get on it;
but we were not sure that we would.
But this time, with prayers,
she managed to organize the transportation
and both our families went.
It was amazing that this train had a special
carriage for people with disabilities,
and we were taken to this carriage,
and the train
was even delayed until we sat down.
They were waiting for us.
Before we left, we informed the elders
that we had made up our minds
and that we were going.
The brothers sent us
a certain amount of money.
They said, “This is to help you.”
And when we boarded the train,
we found out
that we had to pay for the train,
although before that,
all evacuation trains were free.
They told us the amount for the tickets,
and it was exactly the same
as what the brothers had given us.
The only opportunity
for me to leave was by evacuation train.
Usually a compartment
is designed for 4 people;
in ours there were 13 of us.
On the train, I was traveling
with a family from my congregation.
In order to reduce our worries
and switch to something positive,
we decided to take the opportunity
and preach to the people.
We drove for 16 hours,
and we arrived very late.
In Lviv, a group of police approached
and took me
to the Security Service of Ukraine.
Since I have a Russian passport,
I am essentially like an enemy to them.
I knew that Jehovah was with Dad,
that He would protect him,
and that most likely
he would not be dragged there to prison
or something like that.
But I was worried that they might simply
not let us go further
and that we would stay in Ukraine.
I sat and waited.
I prayed to Jehovah.
And this helped me
not to focus on my negative thoughts
but to trust Jehovah completely.
They began to incite me
to say such slogans as
“Glory to Ukraine!”
I answered:
“I am one of Jehovah’s Witnesses,
“and we take a neutral position in this war.
“We do not support the Russian side,
but I also cannot glorify
some other country.”
And then he told me to curse Putin.
I said, “Well, since I am a believer,
I cannot speak swear words
so I cannot say this either.”
And the policeman said:
“Yes, I know your people.
They don’t want to defend their homeland.”
I replied, “Well, if I were a conscript,
I would fight against Ukraine now,
since I am Russian.”
He said: “Well, then save your family.
Go with God, Alexsei!”
He gave me back my documents
and wished me a good journey.
We waited at the border for about 17 hours.
The difficulty was that it was very cold.
The car got cold quickly,
and there were no toilets.
As it was our turn to be checked,
we spoke to the female border guard
and explained to her
that I could go into labor at any time
and that I really needed my husband’s help
—I couldn’t even carry my own bag.
Then she told me that if I wanted,
I could stay in Ukraine,
but there was no way
my husband would be allowed to leave.
Our final destination
was the city of Chełm in Poland,
where we arrived.
And there was an outburst of emotions
when the volunteers
quickly brought us to the sisters
and we saw the jw.org sign.
There were so many emotions.
That is, well, it took our breath away,
and we just couldn’t speak, and now, indeed,
this was the moment
when we understood that this is it;
we were saved!
When we arrived at the Kingdom Hall,
we were feeling really emotional.
We were very worried and nervous
about what was going to happen.
But once we entered the Kingdom Hall,
we were able to calm down.
There were a lot
of local brothers and sisters
who greeted us with hugs.
Many even had tears in their eyes
when they saw
that I was going to have a baby soon.
At that moment, we realized
that Jehovah and our brotherhood
will take care of us as their own family
in whatever circumstances we find ourselves.
I sat in the Kingdom Hall
and didn’t know what to plan next.
The elder who was on shift
at the Kingdom Hall
took time for me,
and he encouraged me very much.
He acknowledged everything
I had gone through and comforted me,
letting me know that I was now safe.
He assured me that Jehovah is with me
and will continue to support me
and that I have no reason to fear.
I remember a moment
when I went outside in the evening
and the view of the Carpathian Mountains
opened up to me.
The birds were singing.
It strengthened me so much.
And I remembered the thought
where a brother said
that if Jehovah created all of this,
won’t he help you?
And, well, later I felt that power on me
when everything began to resolve so quickly,
and I didn’t even think
that it would resolve that way.
My biggest fear
is probably the fear of the unknown,
but now we see
that there is nothing to be afraid of.
There was a Disaster Relief Committee
that helped to accommodate refugees.
And the sisters working with the committee
were looking for routes
and looking for transport
—buses, trains, and planes.
We were accommodated
with an amazing family
where we felt really comfortable.
We felt completely understood.
It is simply incredible.
Of course, Jehovah
has accompanied us all these years.
All these years
we have been feeling his help,
but now it is just like an avalanche
—an avalanche of miracles, help, and support.
Different brothers and sisters
began to visit us straightaway,
and each time there was someone new.
And they always brought some bags or boxes.
And for the non-Witnesses,
it was like a miracle.
And they kept asking:
“Do you know them?
Are these your relatives?”
“No, we have never seen them before.”
“Why are they helping you?”
Oh, it was such a good witness.
On March 24, exactly a month
after the war began,
Daniil and I
gave birth to a beautiful baby girl.
It was a great help
that a sister who could translate
was present in the delivery room.
This made me feel calmer.
We try to speak
at every possible opportunity,
sending each other text messages
and communicating via videoconferencing.
I send Daniil videos and photos
of our little girl, Miroslava.
And we constantly
reassure each other of our love
and that we appreciate each other very much.
Feeling forced to move to another country
is very difficult.
But thanks to Jehovah,
I have become convinced
that his organization
really functions as one body.
And I am very happy to be part of it.
The brotherhood
—these are the people
waiting for you with open arms.
We felt that
it was Jehovah
who personally helped us.
It is really evident that a lot of refugees
from Ukraine who come here
are alone with their problems,
and it is very difficult for them.
How much easier it is for us
because we have
a friendly brotherhood with us!
And although we are in a foreign country,
we feel at home.
All thanks go to Jehovah!
Well, that was faith-strengthening,
wasn’t it?
No doubt that Jehovah is going
to support us in any situation.
So now we’re going to give attention
to Brother Tony Morris.
Hi, Tony.
Hey, hey.
What was your name again?
And Brother Morris is going
to talk to us on the theme
“They Will Be Sensational!”
Now, in a moment, I’ll explain what
is going to be sensational.
But first, please open your Bibles
to Hebrews chapter 6,
or find it on your phone or tablet.
Now, Paul, here in this letter,
is addressing those with the heavenly hope.
And he makes a point here about two things
he covers in verse 17 of Hebrews 6
about “the promise” and the “oath.”
So it’s “impossible for [Jehovah] to lie,”
as verse 18 touches on.
But this is what is connected with this hope
for the ones that have the heavenly hope
and by extension the other sheep.
So it’s infallible.
It’s going to happen just as he promised.
And Paul at least three times
experienced shipwreck;
that much we know.
Maybe we’ll find out there was more later.
But notice what he writes here
with a heart full of experience
in verse 19:
“We have this hope
“as an anchor for the soul,
both sure and firm,
and it enters in within the curtain.”
The anchor
—it’s just critical
that the other sheep
and the anointed
have their anchor in shape.
Now, The Watchtower  just last year,
February 20, 2021,
on page 30,
mentioned this profound thought:
“An anchor stabilizes a ship during a storm
“and stops it from drifting onto rocks.
“But an anchor is useful
only if the chain that attaches to the ship
“does not break. . . .
[So] if we lose our faith, we lose our hope.”
The Watchtower  has that profound thought
for all of God’s people.
For now, we’re facing
what Revelation chapter 21 says
in symbolic language.
We’ll turn to Revelation 21,
and this is why it’s so critical
to have this clear about our hope
being the anchor there.
In verse 1 of Revelation 21:
“And I saw a new heaven and a new earth;
“for the former heaven and the former earth
had passed away,
[now notice]
and the sea is no more.”
Well, “the sea is no more.”
What are we talking about here?
Well, that means that after Armageddon,
there’s no more “sea.”
Well, obviously,
that’s not the literal oceans,
or the seas, there.
That’s the demon-agitated sea
of wicked mankind
—gone.
But it’s not gone yet.
And just like in literal wars,
submarines are used to sneak up on ships.
Satan is the same way
—he and his demon horde—
so he’s going to use any means he can
to try to wreck our ship.
It’s an individual one-on-one with Jehovah.
And you know, many of you—
I look out to you couples
and you’re very close;
you love each other.
Well, you know,
your mate
(for those of you who are married)
has to have this kind of relationship
with their Father, Jehovah.
Everybody does unless you’re a toddler.
Then you’re going to be in God’s hands.
If your parents are Witnesses,
there’s a good chance you’ll be OK.
So this is war.
That’s the point.
This is war.
And it’s not going to get easier
until “the sea is no more.”
Now, during these times,
in this war,
we face stormy seas.
This includes a lot of things,
loss of material things.
There are all kinds
of other storms that come up,
and it’s connected
with the sea of wicked mankind.
But this one here is the one
that we’re going to emphasize:
the death of a loved one
—the death of a loved one.
What a storm!
And that is when our anchor is essential.
As individuals, that anchor is essential.
Never lose your anchor!
I’m not saying
you’re not going to be battered
or I’m not going to be battered,
but don’t lose your anchor.
Jehovah gave it to us,
and Paul made that clear.
Now, a sister wrote in,
and I certainly wouldn’t name her.
She may eventually see this program here,
but I thought it was worth sharing with you.
But she was honest and humble about it.
But it shows, you know,
God’s people are imperfect.
I don’t know if you noticed that.
Don’t say anything, David,
when you come out later.
So her dad died faithful.
Now, here’s what she admits
before her dad died.
She says that when she saw others
shedding tears after their loved ones died,
she thought:
‘Why do people cry so much?
They will see them again.’
Would that comfort you
if you just lost a loved one?
No.
However, her dad died.
Here’s what she honestly stated,
to her credit,
“But now I understand.”
And she wept, shed tears.
Yes, the loss of a loved one
can be devastating,
no doubt about it, an incredible storm.
Now to our theme,
“They Will Be Sensational!,”
what is “they”?
They are family reunions in the new world.
The things that are coming. Oh!
Go ahead and use your imagination.
Jehovah won’t fault you for that.
They’re going to be sensational!
They really are.
Now, another word for “sensational”
is “astonishing”;
another one is “astounding.”
And what’s nice is this is not a fantasy.
This is what’s going to happen.
It’s a reality.
So let’s consider
some families in Bible history.
First of all, we’ll start with Noah.
He was born in 2970 B.C.E.
—126 years after Adam’s death.
So he didn’t have any interaction with Adam.
I think he got a blessing there, personally.
And when his father, Lamech,
named him Noah
(you know, that’s in scripture),
he said:
‘This one will bring us comfort from our work
‘and from the pain of our hands
resulting from the ground
which Jehovah has cursed.’
Beautiful expression!
And you know Noah lived up to that.
When he lived,
he faced materialized angels.
They left “their . . . proper dwelling place”
and produced offspring
—those hybrid Nephilim.
And ‘the earth became full of violence.’
But Noah and his family,
they avoided all of that corruption.
So he was faultless.
He “walked with the true God.”
Now, he lived up
to what Jehovah expected of him.
And find Genesis, if you would please,
and we’re going to look at chapter 8
—Genesis chapter 8.
Now,
I will mention this here
in the chapter before 8,
which would be chapter 7,
we do find the point in verse 13:
“On that very day, Noah went into the ark
“along with his sons,
Shem, Ham, and Japheth,
[and notice] and his wife
and the three wives of his sons.”
So they went in the ark.
They had all worked around it and everything.
And now we find in chapter 8,
verses 16 and 17,
after the Flood:
“Go out of the ark,
you, your wife,
your sons and your sons’ wives.”
So here we go.
But we know
that’s just Shem, Ham, and Japheth.
That’s what the scripture said.
We don’t know the names
of the wife
or the sons’ wives.
Why?
You can ask God,
but I don’t see anything in here
that’s going to tell me
why he decided not to have it in there.
You know,
it has nothing to do with being worthy.
It’s all about the lineage it went through.
And, you know,
we all know better
than to argue with God.
‘You know, God, I really love your word
but, you know, a couple of things here . . .’
Not too bright to have that kind of attitude.
So these are beautiful, faithful women.
And here’s the point:
During the new world, my,
what a family reunion
they’re going to have!
And how thrilled you’re going to be,
because I’m sure you’ve got some questions
about what that was like!
And then we don’t have much
while they were on the ark;
how did things go?
I mean, you know, a lot of the old-timers
here at Bethel and at other Bethels
have so many stories, and they’re a pleasure.
Well, get ready.
There’ll be a whole lot
of sensational stories
from sensational family reunions
like this one.
It’s a wonderful, wonderful future.
Now, in the same Bible book of Genesis,
let’s go over to chapter 21,
and notice here,
there’s a different example of a family
that’ll enjoy a sensational reunion
in the new world.
It highlights the fact
that Sarah became pregnant,
and this is the love of Abraham’s life,
as far as humans go.
And they bore a son together, Isaac.
And this is just incredible!
You take chapter 22 of Genesis,
and Jehovah gives this direction.
And for any of you who are fathers
that are listening
(and you don’t have to be a father
to be touched by this, obviously,
because you love Jehovah
and you love Jesus),
he says in verse 2:
“Take, please, your son,
your only son whom you so love.”
Oh, yeah, he knew,
‘Abraham sure loves Isaac.’
And this is remarkable.
He knows he loves him so much.
And what does He tell him to do?
Sacrifice him.
So we don’t have all or any record
of any feelings Abraham had during all this.
We get some indication
of some things going on here.
But those of you
that have ever had a son or sons,
the impact here is just phenomenal.
He did go all the way with the knife,
and he had actually,
in mind and heart,
committed the sacrifice.
But Jehovah,
you know, after he reached out with the knife
and everything’s in motion,
Jehovah had the angel call out
“Abraham, Abraham!” just in time.
That stopped the whole thing.
And Abraham said: “Here I am!”
And then he told him in verse 12:
“Do not harm the boy.”
How did he feel?
Talk about a relief.
And all this time before,
Isaac is wondering:
‘You know, we got this all set up.
Where’s the sheep?’
I don’t know.
They must’ve had
some interesting conversations
after these events.
Now, do you think
that they’re not going to enjoy
a sensational family reunion?
Oh, my!
And then when they find out
(because they didn’t know,
they heard certain things)
that Jehovah,
he went all the way
and allowed the sacrifice with his Son.
Oh.
See that pain
—a lot of pain—
so a sensational family reunion
with Abraham, Isaac, Sarah,
and other family members.
Now another one in the scriptures
—let’s find Job,
and how well we know
and appreciate Job so much!
And when we go right there,
the first chapter,
it just helps us to appreciate
in the first chapter here;
verse 1 talks
about this “upright man of integrity.”
And verse 2 reveals
that “seven sons
and three daughters were born to him.”
And then all the livestock is mentioned.
But this is quite interesting,
in verse 4 of chapter 1:
“Each of his sons
would hold a banquet at his house
on his own set day.”
What’s that all about?
Well, we have the gift of the Insight  book,
as well as so many other references.
But this has always been a blessed gift.
And the Insight  stated:
“It would seem that Job’s seven sons
held a family gathering
“(possibly a spring or harvest festival)
“and as the feasting
made the week-long circuit,
each son hosted the banquet
in his own house.”
That’s a close family.
They were all just such a close family
that loved each other,
just loved each other.
However,
we know in the following verses,
the challenge of Satan in heaven
and all that’s recorded for us here.
And then it starts in verse 13.
“Sons and daughters [are] eating” there.
And then the message comes to Job
about the cattle and the Sabeans attacking.
And then, you see, the wicked one
—we never said he wasn’t smart,
because see verse 16, “fire from God.”
So, you know,
now they’re going to blame God for this.
Satan says, ‘Yeah, they are all going
to think it was God that did this,’
even though he’s behind it
and it falls from there and kills the sheep.
Well, then verses 18 and 19:
“While he was still speaking, . . .
“‘Your sons and your daughters
were eating and drinking wine
“‘in their oldest brother’s house.
Suddenly a great wind came.’”
Now, apparently,
Jehovah allowed that kind of power.
In that case, it killed them all
—dead, killed them—
seven sons and three daughters.
Now, that’s history.
Let’s go to Job 42
—Job chapter 42
and,
see, he’s been through the test,
and we find here
where it mentions,
you know,
after the things have passed here
and Jehovah doubled everything
and he’s rich again.
Verse 13
—Job 42:13:
“He also came to have seven more sons
and three more daughters.”
Isn’t that—?
I mean—
Jehovah is just so wonderful.
But, see, Jehovah is not finished with him
because in the new world
(and likely he’ll work out the timing)
he’ll have all 20 children
—Job, and his wife—
a sensational family reunion!
Now more to our day,
I just want to touch on—
I just saw on the website
on September 26th, I think,
a beautiful, beautiful story here,
and it had been touched on
with an Awake!  before,
but there’s David Maza’s life story,
“A Happy Family, Shattered and Rebuilt.”
And they talk about Davey, David,
or they call him Davey.
I kept thinking,
‘Boy, what a sensational family reunion
they’re going to have during the new world!’
So we know you precious brothers,
a lot of you, are numb of heart,
losing loved ones during these last days.
But please don’t lose heart.
You’ve got your anchor.
See?
And then the sister wraps it up for us here,
a dear friend of mine.
“My mother and father had 17 children.”
Just recently she wrote this:
“Recently I lost the last remaining sibling,
“leaving me with no siblings at all.
“Strangely, I remember where I was
and what I was doing
“when I lost each of them.
“What a blessing it will be
“when these dreaded memories
will be gone and replaced
“when I see my resurrected mom and dad
“and welcome back each child
who’s stored in Jehovah’s memory!”
She writes:
“What a grand reunion that will be
“as we gradually grow to perfection
with the prospect of living forever!”
What a touching expression
from our precious sister!
So the reunion with your loved ones
is a certainty.
You will be enjoying
your family reunions soon.
Keep your anchor in good shape
until the sea of wicked mankind is no more.
And we entreat you;
focus on the coming
sensational family reunions.
Well, wasn’t that touching?
Really encouraging.
So we appreciate that very much, Tony.
Now, at this time,
I have an announcement to make,
and it concerns the worldwide Bethel family
—the worldwide Bethel family.
Now, as you know,
the elders received training
at the School for Congregation Elders.
But we have a lot of elders at Bethel,
and many of them have
a tremendous amount of experience.
But they have a lot of responsibility too.
Many of them are overseers.
They oversee large departments.
So, what do we do to meet their needs?
What about a new course?
A new course
for those in oversight positions:
It’s called
Principles of Divine Oversight
—A School for Overseers.
Now, let’s let a couple of brothers
tell us more about it.
Welcome to the school for overseers:
Principles of Divine Oversight—Acts 6:3!
I invite you to read with me the verse
that is the basis for this school
—Acts 6:3:
“So, brothers, select for yourselves
seven reputable men from among you,
“full of spirit and wisdom,
that we may appoint them
over this necessary matter.”
Because of the rapid expansion of the work
taking place around the world,
there’s a pressing need
for more loving and effective overseers.
What would you say
are the marks of a good overseer?
An overseer’s primary job
is to take care of people.
He humbly accepts the reality
that he does not know everything
or have all the answers.
Don’t get stuck in the past.
Be the point of contact
for your fellow workers.
A good overseer is all of those,
but he must also follow
the divine pattern of oversight.
Training is essential,
but how it’s done is crucial.
To this end,
Principles of Divine Oversight—Acts 6:3
(a school for overseers)
will help brothers in oversight
prepare others to become
loving and effective overseers
in the future.
The school is rooted in Bible principles.
Let’s read together
the last scripture in Ezekiel chapter 48.
Verse 35 says:
“And the name of the city
from that day on will be
Jehovah Is There.”
Brothers, when you apply
the divine pattern of oversight
by proactively training others
and humbly keeping your “gates open”
to fresh lines of thought,
you can be absolutely sure
that Jehovah will reward
your sincere efforts.
Yes, divine blessings
will not only flow into your department,
but they will cascade
throughout your entire branch,
bringing refreshment
and will continue spreading across the world.
And Jehovah’s great spiritual city
will continue to grow and flourish!
It’s a good course.
We tried it out already on a few Bethelites,
and they appreciated it very much.
So we’re sure that this
is going to be a real blessing
not only here in the United States
but at Bethels around the world.
What do you think is left to be revealed?
Part 2 of the annual meeting
has more exciting announcements,
and we’ll watch it in next month’s broadcast.
Before we conclude, let’s travel to Niger.
Niger stretches
from the fertile deltas of the Niger River
to the grand Sahara Desert.
With such drastic differences
between locations,
publishers need to use
a variety of preaching methods.
In the capital city of Niamey,
they reach commuters
walking the busy streets.
In remote desert cities,
they seek out merchants
and wade through fertile riverbeds
to find farmers
tending their crops in paddies.
While in the desert,
many publishers preach
wearing a combined turban and veil,
which protects them
from the windblown sand.
Tough conditions are made bearable
because the Nigerien people
are so hospitable.
There’s a common phrase
in the local language Hausa
that translates to
“your guest is your king.”
Many will stop and listen to what
our brothers show them from the Bible.
Both young and old in Niger
count it a privilege
to announce God’s Kingdom
and to enjoy spiritual food.
It’s a pleasure to share with you
all of the love and greetings
of our dear brothers
from the Bobiel, Haro Banda Zarma,
and the Arlit congregations.
From the World Headquarters
of Jehovah’s Witnesses,
this is JW Broadcasting.